<html><head><title>Workshop notes</title></head>
<body>
<p>Octave 2006 workshop notes by Raghunathan Sudarshan</p>

<h2>Participants</h2>
<pre>
   (*) Andy Adler (AA), U. of Ottawa
   (*) Muthu Annamalai (MA), U. of Texas
   (*) David Bateman (DB), Motorola
   (*) Bill Denney (BD), U. of Penn
   (*) John Eaton (JE), U. of Wisconsin
   (*) Etienne Grossman (EG), U. of Kentucky
   (*) Tom Holroyd (TH), NIH
   (*) Paul Kienzle (PK1), NIST
   (*) Przemek Klosowski (PK2), NIST
   (*) Rick Niles (RN), Mitre
   (*) Jens Rueknagel (JR), Universitaet Brunsweig
   (*) Alois Schloegl (AS), Universitaet Graz
   (*) Daniel Sebald (DS), U. of Wisconsin
   (*) Raghunathan Sudarshan (RS), Interactive Supercomputing
   (*) Robert Weigel (RW), GMU
</pre>

<h2>20th April 2006</h2>

<h3>9:20 -- 10:20, "State of Octave", John Eaton</h3>
<pre>
=> Acknowledgements
   - acknowledged Jim Rawlings, et al.

=> Octave time-line
   - mentioned that Octave is a teenager

=> Version 3.0 features

  - Fully Implemented: MPI, multidimensional arrays and sparse matrices

  - Partially Implemented: cell(idx) = [] and [x{:}] = f

  - Incomplete: Manual

=> Package System (like R)

  - Spoke about having a repository

  - AA mentioned about having to download all dependencies each time

  - JE spoke about the need to stop responding to bugs in individual
    packages and BD suggested a bug reporting mechanism that will
    send a package-specific bug to the package owner.

  - PK2 mentioned that if a package is downloaded often-enough, it
    should be part of the core

  - JE mentioned that in a package system each package could have an
    independent release cycle and will not be tied to the release
    cycle of the product. Spoke about the need to break up
    octave-forge since the quality of the individual components was
    quite variable and one should not have to download the entire
    package. Also mentioned about some packages in octave-forge
    shadowing built-in functions in Octave and causing bugs

  - DB mentioned about the possibility of using Soren Haupberg's
    package system

=> Graphics

  - JE spoke about the need for Handle Graphics, but before that
    spoke about fully supporting multiplot, multiframe and printing

  - RN mentioned that get and set could be done using global
    variables or M-files and that the latter solution was more robust
    in that the variables couldn't just be cleared away

  - Spoke about 4-5 different implementations to choose from and
    suggested choosing one and sticking to it

  - Some requirements:

    - Platform independent
    - Matlab compatible
    - Write in M (so scriptable)
    - Extensible (not anti-Emacs)
    - Thread-safe

=> What features to support for Version 3.0?

  - Add package manager and support for [x{:}] = f, or ...

  - Add package manager, support for [x{:}] = f, Handle graphics, Object system, ...

  - Mentioned inclincation towards the first alternative

  - AA(?) raised the point of documenting and freezing the the
    OCT-file interface so that ABI compatibility is maintained
    between multiple Octave versions without having to recompile

=> Action Items

  - Updating the NEWS file

  - Modifying the website

  - Mailing lists

  - Migrating source repository to Subversion
       - DB made a point about being able to use SSH

  - Unit tests

  - Bug tracking

    - Spoke about having a bugs email folder and using that to keep track of bugs

    - Using web-based interfaces like Bugzilla inconvenient because
      the text-boxes are too small

  - Unit testing

  - Release manager

  - Advocacy

  - Maintaining compatibility with Matlab

    - Trade-off between having maintainable code and having features
      that were "bug-compatible" with Matlab

    - RN spoke about a Matlab compatibility flags, but JE countered
      saying that it was too complicated


=> Requirements for Octave

  - Easy for undergraduates

  - Relevant after graduation

  - Installs on Windows

  - Can be used in research

  - Freely available

  - Fast interpreter

  - Comes with a compiler

=> Focus items for the meeting

  - Concrete plans for 3.0

  - Graphics and GUI tools

  - Project administration issues

  - Future - Octave or something else?


=> Post-presentation discussion

  - AS, AA, PK2 and RN briefly discussed the possibility of defining
    a standard for M-files (possibly in collaboration with TMW) and
    making Octave conform to that instead of being tied to the
    language changes in each version of Matlab

</pre>
</body>
